All right welcome back.
So this video has nothing to do with Python.
We will get there eventually but this is just about sequel.
The basic syntax to create a table then we'll learn how to insert and select and then we'll move over
to Python just to get everyone on the same page.
So if we already know sequel then this probably is not going to be that exciting.
So this video in particular is focused on creating tables the sequel 3 data types that we get.
And actually if you do no sequel from LIKE MY as well or postscripts the data types are different.
So I would at least check out that part and I'm going to start by just giving you a quick tour of sequel.
So I'm going to go to my show and as we've seen we can do just sequel 3.
It may just be sequel lite depending on how you set up in your path what you added on a PC.
But either one try that you'll know which one works and you'll see the prompt changes and the first
thing I'll show you can type help.
And this gives us a bunch of commands.
Most of these have to do with like maintaining and sort of dealing with databases.
These all these commands that start with a dot are actually creating or adding to a database or interacting
with databases using sequel.
These are like meta functions essentially commands that you can do one of them that will come back to
you as Dot tables.
This will tell us if we have any tables in our database and we currently don't.
So that's what we're going to work on and this video is how do we create a new table.
So if you're not familiar with sequel at all or databases The idea is that we stored data in these different
tables so like a book's table or a user's table and each table has different columns so that we could
have four books an author and a quantity in stock price and some of those are going to be numeric.
Some of them are text and that's what we'll start with here.
And the documentation for sequel like sort of austere but includes under overview documents.
Nope no programming interfaces data types.
So I'm looking for.
So these data types there's really five.
Actually it's more like four.
If we don't include no four different types that we could use for each individual column.
So if you wanted to use a number for example we have two choices an integer which is a whole number
or a real which is a float or in other languages a double.
So if you want a decimal point you need a real like a price if you need a whole number.
Use an integer like if you're doing quantity or age or something.
Unless of course you want to store age with fractions anyway.
Then you would use a real.
Then there's this last one which is a bit weird called blob.
Essentially if you make something type of blob whatever you put in there will be stored exactly as it
is.
So there will be no effort to change it into an integer or into text or something like that.
We're not going to really focus on blob in this video or in this section because it's so short.
It's not a sequel course but as a note there is no Boolean data type in sequel.
Use a number 0 or 1 integers.
There's no date or time either.
So a lot of more powerful databases do include that here.
You just have to store data on your own as text or possibly as boolean or if boolean as a real different
options.
OK.
With that out of the way now let's talk about how we define a table.
So the syntax to make a table is pretty straightforward.
It's basic sequel.
So I have a new file I'm going to type my code in just so that you can see as I'm typing it and then
I'll start by copy and pasting it over to my shell.
So if I'm going to make a new table I need to start with create table.
Now technically you don't have to capitalize it but that the convention when you're doing a sequel commands
the commands are actually capitalized and then any of your data is not.
So create table.
What do we want a color table.
Let's say that I'm just doing something silly I'm storing dogs.
So usually it's pluralized create table dogs and each dog will just have a name a breed and an age something
like that.
Now in parentheses we pass in a list a comma separated list of the different columns who won.
So I like to do this on separate lines like this and let's say the first one is name which will be text.
We really only have a couple of choices Greta will also be text and then age will do a whole number
so that will be integer just like that.
And then we need a semi-colon at the end if any sequence statement.
So come back over here and paste it in and hit enter and it doesn't look like anything happened.
We don't get any messages but if I now type tables again you'll see OK.
We now have a dogs table.
And if I did this again but instead of dogs I created a second table called cats and do tables again.
Now we have two tables.
There are similar different names but the same data are the same columns at least inside of them and
they're totally empty.
So they just it's like a spot for us to insert our data.
Now here's the thing that I do want to address now if I quit with control D and I reopen sequel line
and I do not tables or pressures tables are gone totally lost.
Notice how it says connected to a transient in-memory database.
So it is not going to persist once I quit out of here.
We need to save it basically to a file and we have two options to do this.
I can do a dot open once I'm inside of sequel.
Open filename so open and let's say I want my database to be let's do dog D-B dot DB That's the file
type.
Now if I run my create table again I can remember that.
Here we go OK and we do tables and I quit now if I do an ls you'll see there's a new file here.
I never actually created that file myself.
I said open this file which siecle light takes to mean open or create this file and then save all of
our data to that.
So when I said create table dogs it went into this database file.
So now if I want to open it back up I can do a sequel lite dog D.B and sequel like three dog D-B And
now do tables.
And there we go.
We have the dogs table.
Now the other thing that we can do is do a sequel like three and then a database file that doesn't exist
like cat D-B dot D-B doesn't exist yet.
But now if I create the cat table like that I do tables we have a cat's table I quit.
There is now a cat's file or cats DP file and I can open it again sequel like three cats and do tables
and my data is still there.
So the point is there's two different ways of doing it but either way we want to save or data to a file
if we don't it's gone as soon as we close out the database.
OK.
So we saw just the very very basics of making a table we haven't put anything in there yet.
So that's coming up next.